Class 09 Transcript Notes

1. Adding login and logout pages

- [Instructor] We are almost there. The last thing remaining for our app is to create a proper login place. Although the admin login is nice, it can only be accessed by staff members of the system. So we need to create the authentication interface as well. Let's do this. So first let's go to home, then views, and then let's import here from django.contrib.auth.views, import loginview. And then let's create a class called logininterfaceview that inherits from login view. And in here, we only need to define really one thing, the template name. So let's go call it home/login.html. Okay, so we can forget about the URLs. So let's do this now. So in here, let's add a login page that inherits from views, login interface view as view. Okay, so now we can create a template. So in here, let's add the new login.html. And in here, really all we need to do is extends base.html to get all our configuration, to then block content, and finally, endblock. Okay, so in here, what we need is simply a form. This form should have method equals to post. Because this is a form with the method posts, we can't forget what our dear friend csrf_token. And then we're going to use form as P because it's going to be rendered as P tags in the HTML. That's the only difference. And finally, we're going to have an input. The type's going to be submit. Let's add some class here. So BTN and BTN secondary. And that's it. Okay, let's try this out. So we're going to go here, go to login. Okay, let's try to log in. Okay, so what's happened here? The problem is that Django has a default system, defined configuration for the redirect, which leads to a page we don't have, which is this account profile page. Because this is a global definition, we should change this not in the class-based views, but we should change it on the settings. So let's do this. Let's go back, then let's go to smartnotes, settings, and then we can add this way below here and we can add login redirect url, is going to be smart/notes. So this is where we're going to redirect the user after it is logged in. So let's try this again. I just remember we are completely logged in here. So first, let's log out to make sure our login work. So log in, then let's add our credentials and it works. Amazing. Okay, so similarly, we also want a logout view, right? We don't want to have to go to the admin to do this. So let's add this real quick. So on the views, again, from here we're going to also import logout view. And similarly, we're going to create a logout interface view that inherits from logout view. And the only thing we need is the template name. Yes. So let's add here, home/logout.html. Okay, so let's create the template. Logout.html. For sake of time, we can copy this and paste it here. And instead of having a form, we're going to have an H1 that says, hope to see you soon. Okay. Oh yes, and we're missing the URLs. So let's do this. We are copying logout and logout. And for the sake of organization, let's add names to this URLs, shall we? So this is going to be our homepage. We can actually get rid of this:

"path('authorized/', views.AuthorizedView.as_view(), name='authorized'), # replaced views.authorized for views.AuthorizedView class that uses the 'as_view' method"

Our system doesn't really need this. Then we have login and finally logout. Okay, one more tidy up to do. Let's make this empty. Okay, let's see what that causes. If we go back, the empty here means that now this welcome page is going to be the default page without any path. And then if you go to logout and try to access the smart notes again, there you go, because we're logged out, now we can't access the notes and it redirects to the Django login. We need to change that as well, but I'm going to leave this to you.

2. Adding a signup page (updated)

- [Instructor] Okay, we are so close. It's time to add it all together. So let's go to the base.html template and add a couple of things. Bear with me for a second. So we're going to add a nav bar. Let's indent this correctly. And then in here, we're going to pass a couple of classes. So we're going to use navbar navbar-dark and bg-dark. Okay. We're also going to need another div here. And this div, we have a class ms-auto. And let's create a link here for the Login page. So we're going to pass a URL, and this URL was going to be the login. Let's close this, and let's add some style here as well. So the glasses we're going to use is going to be the btn btn-outline-light, because we're going to have a black navbar, and me-1. Okay, perfect. Let's see what happens here. Now we have a top bar, black, and we have a button for the login. Perfect. However, if the user is authenticated, it doesn't make sense to have a login button here, right? So let's add some logic to change that. Let's go back to the code. So what we can do here is add an if statement to see if the user is authenticated. If the user is authenticated, what we're going to do is add a logout logic. However, if the user is not authenticated, this means else, then we're going to show the Login button. Finally, we can end our if. Okay, so the way we add a logout logic here will depend on the version of Django that you are running. On versions 4.x or below, it's very simple. We just need a link here. So we can copy these, Django 4.0, and we can have the logout URL and a Logout. And that's it. However, if you are running a version that is later or the same as 5.0, this link won't work. This is because now, logout must be a POST request instead of a GET. Thankfully, we know how to make a POST request. We need a form. What we can do here is to wrap our button into a form to actually make a POST request. So let's do that. So let's remove this, and I am going to change here. So if you're using 5.0+, you have to do this. Let's create a new form, okay? The method must be post. We need an action URL. So in this case here, we're going to pass the logout URL. So it's the same URL, but now we're going to do a POST method and some class with some style. So d-inline here. Perfect. Remember, because this is a form, we're making a POST request, we need our security token. So let's add the csrf-token here. And now we need a button called Logout. And this button must have the type submit. And then we can pass the same style as the login here. Okay, let's go back and check what happened. Because I am authenticated, instead of showing the Login, it is actually showing me the Logout page. Awesome. Since we're already here and we have a navigation bar, let's also add a button to the homepage. So we can actually copy this here, and we can add this, if the user is authenticated, a Home button, and then we're going to pass the URL to be home. Let's go back, let's refresh. And there you go. Done and done. Now we have our whole app and a navigation bar fully working.


3. Finishing touches (updated)

- [Instructor] Okay, we are so close. It is time to add it all together. So let's go to static, templates, base.html. And then in here what we're going to do is add a nav, so a navigation bar. We need a couple of classes here. So let's add navbar navbar-dark, and a dark background. Okay, inside of it, we're going to need a div. And this div must have a class, ms-auto. And then in here we can add a link. Okay, so let's add a link to the login page. So in here, let's add href, that has the command URL, login, and then some classes here. Let's make this a button. So btn btn-outline-light. And let's add some space in here. Okay, let's try this out. Amazing. So you can see here that now we have a Login button, but it doesn't really make sense, you have a Login button for a logged in user. So we can see here that we have a logged in user. So let's add some logic to change this. So if it's an authenticated user, we want to display the logout URL, not the login. So in here, what we can do is use an if statement. So if user.is_authenticated, yes, this is the same method as we used before. We're going to display something. And then if else, we're going to display something else. And then we need to end the if. Okay, so now if the user is authenticated, we don't want to show the Login, we want to show the Logout. Same thing here, Logout. Okay, let's see how that goes. I'm going to refresh. Okay, now I have a Logout. If I try this, I'm going to get my end message. And now I'm going to see the Login, because I'm not authenticated. So let's try that. Let's authenticate here. And there you go. So we have our Login, Logout. We can use the same logic to add other things. So for instance, if a user is authenticated, we also want to have a Home button. So they can go to notes.list. And a Create button. So they can go and create a new note. But if they are not authenticated, we also want to display the signup option. Signup, and then signup. Okay, so let's try this out. I'm authenticated. If I click Home, I'll see the notes that I have. If I go to Create, I'll go to the create page, and if I log out, I can see the message saying that I'm logged out. What I can do now as a logged out user is actually signing up. So let's try something different. I'm going to add a username, django. Let's add some passwords here. Let's submit. Okay, so it redirects me to the login page, so I can try my new user. And there you go. Now if you create a new note here, we have our first project up and running with the full authentication cycle.

4. Code challenge: Create a share link for a public note (updated)

- [Narrator] I hope that you enjoyed the challenges we had so far and that you're ready for the last one. Okay, so we have a full working app, but as with any good software, we can add a new functionality still. In the last challenge, we added the functionality to change a note from private to public. Now we can add a new functionality so we can have a link to share public notes with our friends. To do that, we need to create a new view that won't require a logging, and we need to make sure to only allow public notes to be visible through that link and that private notes can never be seen to anyone else that's not authorized. That's it. That's our last functionality, good luck.

5. Solution: Create a share link for a public note

(upbeat music) - [Instructor] To create a share link, we can copy the DetailView that we have before. Then we can remove the necessity of the login required and call it NotesPublicDetailView. Perfect. That would make any note public, which is not what we want. So what we can do is leverage the queryset again. And let's change the basic filter to filter just for public notes. Awesome. Now we can actually create an URL using this view. So we can come here, and let's copy this DetailView here. And let's call this a share link. And then, PublicDetailView. And share. That's it. That's as straightforward as it gets. Let's go to our system to check it out. This is a public note, but as we can see, I'm actually logged in, so I have the right to see this note. Let's try to access the share link. Okay, it's the same template, everything is the same. But because I'm logged in, it shouldn't make any difference. Let's try to log out. And access the same link. Perfect. I can see this note because it is public and I'm using the share link. However, notes number 2 is private. Okay. So I don't have access to it because it's private, and it's returning a 404, which makes total sense to what we want. Unauthorized users should never see a private note. So that's it. We have a full functionality of sharing notes publicly and never sharing any private notes. I hope you have enjoyed the challenges and learned a lot on the way. And I hope also that you fell in love with the Django documentation as much as I do.


Final Module: Conclusion

Next steps
Selecting transcript lines in this section will navigate to timestamp in the video
- [Leticia] We've reached the end of our course. Now you're ready to build complex systems with Django and you can do it with full authentication flows. This is a huge deal! It's one of the best selling points about, "Start Coding with Django," but it doesn't stop there. If you want to continue on Django, here's a few things I recommend. I created a second course here on LinkedIn Learning called, "Unit Testing in Django." This course will use the system you've created on this course to learn how to create unit tests, making your system more reliable. Being able to test software systems properly is a major skill that all developers should learn, so I highly recommend you to check it out. Next, if you're interested in incorporating APIs into your applications, I'd look at Django REST framework. And finally, if you want to expand your knowledge, there are some other great courses on Django and Python here in LinkedIn Learning Library. Take a look through and watch a few more, cheers!